Hey guys welcome back to the course so in this lecture we're going to talk about what are the popular
areas for outsourcing.
What are their advantages or disadvantages.
What do you need to know about each area and how do you determine whether or not you should pick one
area versus the other.
So when you go ahead and list your project or start looking for contractors you're probably going to
be amazed at how many different areas and how many different countries are represented in your project
proposals.
So really quite a lot of different hotspots out there for outsourcing.
But you as someone who is trying to get your project done.
How do you kind of tell the difference between an advantage and a disadvantage with regards to an area.
So the big question is does the country that you outsource from does it really matter.
Well I have to say it's kind of a mixed question.
It's not a clear yes or no.
In some cases absolutely not.
In some cases yes I think there are clear advantages and disadvantages to picking a certain area or
a specific country.
Unfortunately when you ask really anybody else about outsourcing countries and what are their preferred
areas they often will lean on stereotypes and stereotypes are not particularly helpful as they're usually
based off of whatever happened in that person's last experience and are not completely representative
of an area as a whole but also based off of just weird cultural kind of misnomers or misunderstandings.
However it is useful to understand that each area has its own interest cities and each area kind of
has their own unique things about them that if put with prior knowledge it can definitely help you kind
of narrow down your list.
So let me give you three criteria that you should actually use when determining whether or not you should
be specific about an area.
Now these are three things that typically a lot of people don't think about but they're really the only
things that are relevant to me in my experience.
When you are trying to narrow down your list and you're trying to think of geography.
So the first thing you should think about is time zones.
How important is it to you that you're able to communicate with the company or the freelancer that you're
contracting out to.
Does it matter whether or not you can just easily pick up the phone or pick up Skype and immediately
be able to communicate with them.
Does it matter if they are working the same times that you are working.
So there are a lot of different project types that can benefit or find it necessary to work at the same
time as your outsource labor.
If you are running a call center or you need someone to do customer service for you you probably need
those people to work at the same time that you're getting your customer service requests.
Similarly if you're using a virtual assistant it's often the case that you need to interact with them
frequently and you need them to work while you're working.
Typically when you have a project that requires a lot of back and forth you're going to want to look
at time zones and take that into consideration.
If you have a project also that has a lot of changing requirements.
So let's say you have a project but you're constantly updating what needs to be done where you're constantly
changing the directions from day to day.
That might be the case that you need to be able to communicate with them faster more effectively and
more frequently and thus you might actually care about where the company is located.
So a second thing to take into consideration is does your project have some sort of a cultural component
to it.
Now let me explain what exactly I mean by a cultural component.
Now if you're trying to build a project or let's say a Web site or a mobile application and that relies
on something that is very specific to one culture or one area such that someone outside that area would
have a difficult time understanding that that is something you should take into consideration.
Does your app use a lot of phrases that are very localized.
Does it use a lot of idiomatic phrases that might be confusing for someone who's not familiar with what
you're talking about in those types of cases.
It might be a problem when you explain things to your outsourced team or freelancer because they might
just not understand why you're building it or what exactly it's supposed to do.
Now all outsourced freelancers and Laver's firms they're all very good at following directions.
But what we're more concerned with is that they understand the project as a whole and they understand
the bigger questions because that's going to allow them to be more effective in the long term.
And that's going to make it such that they are probably a better partner for a long period of time if
that is the case then obviously you're going to start looking for countries that are a little bit more
say Westernized if you're Western or say if you like live in an Asian country you might want to look
for an outsourced team that can relate specifically to whatever your nation or whatever culture your
application deals with.
So the last criteria that I would introduce is that you think about infrastructure requirements.
Now what exactly do I mean by that.
How important is it that say your freelancer or your outsourced team is available every second of the
day.
So if you have a project that for instance could go off line and I could create a serious problem for
your business and you might want to consider an area that has a better reputation for infrastructure
and what I mean by infrastructure I mean internet speeds.
I mean internet availability.
I mean electricity.
I mean really kind of any issue that could get in between them and getting your work done.
This is specific to for instance people who are doing film projects or any project that deals with uploading
lots of information.
So if you're doing a film project you might have to upload gigabytes and gigabytes of film.
So if you use a country that has slow internet speeds that could actually be a deal breaker so you might
want to focus on areas that at least can handle large file uploads and transfers.
So really I mean it could work the same way and say like a web site if you have a Web site that deals
with large file transfers.
We built an application like that before and you know how do we use say like a limited bandwidth connection.
It really would have been impossible even to build or test it.
But if you have a looser timeline or what it is that you're outsourcing is not crucial to the everyday
operations of your business or your project then you don't really need to be picky about the infrastructure
requirements of where you source your team.
So keep those three criteria in mind because that's what we use to determine whether or not there's
an advantage or a disadvantage to a certain area.
So with that let's cover some of the bigger more popular areas that you're gonna run into.
So right off the bat the biggest one that you're going to notice is South Asia and what I mean by South
Asia is India Bangladesh Sri Lanka Pakistan those four right there are kind of in a lot of cases they'll
end up being 60 percent of the bids that you get sometimes 70 percent of the bids you get.
Now those areas are very prolific because outsourcing and BPO business process outsourcing makes up
a very large portion of the economies in those four countries.
There's also a very strong cultural component in that area.
People grow up knowing that jobs are typically associated with outsourcing or usually good jobs and
so there's a much larger group of people that try to move into that space.
The biggest portion of this is really India.
India is probably the prototypical outsourced country.
When you think of outsourcing you probably think of India.
There are the country that gain traction with outsourcing long before other big outsourcing hubs popped
up.
So let's try to evaluate South Asia based on those three criteria that I gave you.
So first off time zones.
Well India and Bangladesh and that whole area typically will range at least in the United States anywhere
from 10 hours difference to 12 hours difference.
So that's a pretty significant shift.
Usually if you're using the AM PM clock I like to think of it like switching it you literally just flipped
the AM of the PM.
So what that means for you is that typically these India is a country or Bangladesh is a country that's
better if you're OK with them working on their project while you're asleep.
It's better if your more kind of tune towards meeting them when there are morning or night they work
and then you wake up and cap off what they've done for the day.
A lot of firms in India and in this general area they will adjust their schedule to match yours.
But because of the way that the time zone shift works it's never a complete match usually just means
that the more dedicated firms are freelancers can make sure that you have at least three or four hours
of overlap so you can in most cases get half a day overlap with this area but you're never going to
get full complete coverage.
They're not going to work the same 4:51 that you do.
So now culturally This is often debatable but in my head it's very clear as far as Westerners nation
goes.
India is lagging behind the majority of the other outsource hubs.
If you have ever traveled to India it is wildly different than any other western country in general.
It is very hard for an Indian person to understand the same likes and predilections as say someone living
in Western Europe or North America.
So what does that mean.
That means are typically not great if you're trying to pick something again that has a very strong cultural
component to it because that's something that they'll struggle to grasp.
And you're always going to be at a disadvantage with that.
It's also worth noting that if you're an English speaker you are taking this course India speaks a dialect
of English and that's one of the more common misunderstandings about the area.
It's almost better if you're working with a freelancer or an outsource firm that learned English a specific
way.
India has its own dialect and what that means is that they have their own phrases and they have their
own way of saying things so to native English speaker from another country they can often be very hard
to understand.
A lot of times they'll use phrases or concepts or ways of communicating that are very strange and foreign
to you.
You've probably already noticed at this point if you have a project up and you're taking PIDs that probably
at least one Indian freelancer has called you dear.
You haven't already picked up on that.
That's they use that as basically a common way of greeting you and Lisa or I'm coming from that's a
term of intimacy so that always just sounds incredibly strange to them.
That's not strange at all.
Now the last criteria for India and South Asia is infrastructure.
Now infrastructure is one of their weaker points in terms of Internet speed it really just kind of depends.
Their internet speeds in larger hubs like Bangalore or say New Delhi are modest.
They're never going to reach Western standards but it's a modest speed.
So for basic web development mobile application perfectly fine.
Video Production and editing they might struggle outside of the hubs internet quality crashes considerably.
The other part of infrastructure was electricity and that's an issue that they run into constantly.
Even in large areas they will have outages.
Now that's a problem when you have servers when you have storage and you could have issues where you
need On-Call workers.
Now again of course if you don't need any of that you don't need someone who you can snap your fingers
and they show up and fix it.
Then don't worry about picking South Asia.
So keep that in mind when you're thinking about this general geographic area.
So the next one worth discussing is Eastern Europe Eastern Europe is probably the number two I would
say it's probably the second most represented in the bid list that you're going to get for your project.
Eastern Europe could honestly mean a whole range of countries.
You know Ukraine and Poland and Belarus and even like Hungary and Croatia those are very common countries
that get bids from those are countries that have very strong developer cultures.
There's a very large portion of the country that is interested in computer science or tries to get jobs
in computer science.
Now in general if I had to pick between two bids that are the exact same one was in Eastern Europe one
was in India.
Typically it picked Eastern Europe that simply because of three criteria we discussed before they actually
score quite a bit better.
So in time zones they're a little bit better if you're in Europe then they don't have a terrible time
zone switch only a couple of hours ahead.
The United States it's less than India and India is typically 12 for us.
There are usually more around eight or nine.
Culturally it could really range.
I mean a lot of Soviet bloc countries have a lot of differences with westernized countries.
But as a whole they're much much more westernized than say South Asia.
So that makes it a lot easier for them to understand they're probably more familiar with things that
you're familiar with.
They'll probably catch on more references that you make to say popular applications or popular businesses
in the country that you're from.
And then last thing infrastructure infrastructure is again considerably better.
There are several countries that have higher internet speeds than say even the United States.
Romania is actually a great example of a country that's average internet speed is almost up there with
like even South Korea and Japan.
So if you're trying to do large file transfers if you're worried about whatever it is that you're outsourcing
needs high connection speeds usually that's not a problem.
It's a terrible way of generalizing but in general if I were to average out all of the countries that
all kind of come together to build your build your bed base they do have faster internet.
So those are the two biggest hubs.
And honestly if you stay within those two regions you'll do perfectly fine.
I'm going to discuss two other areas briefly and I'm just going to highlight what exactly are the differences
about those and why you would consider them.
So one of them is Southeast Asia in general Southeast Asia is not a big hub for outsourcing.
Thailand and Indonesia don't really make up a big portion of outsourced projects or even outsourced
firms.
The Philippines in general have a much stronger call center culture and in general have better English
speaking skills.
Anecdotally it's actually interesting how many American countries actually outsource their call centers
to the Philippine.
And it's specifically because so many people in the Philippines get English training and cultural training
so that they can actually be passed off as American call center agents.
So keep that in mind if you have a project that's very sensitive towards accents.
If it's something where you need your outsourced freelancer or firm to speak on the phone or make recorded
messages then the Philippines are an area to consider.
The other thing that's very interesting is because of the call center culture a lot of people have what
we call reverse schedules or reverse schedule meaning that they actually sleep when North America Sleeps
and they're awake when North America is awake.
They also do similar schedules switches for Europe as well so if you have something like a virtual assistant
task that could be the spot that's probably the most ideal.
So data entry tasks virtual assistants Philippines can be a great spot for that.
Developers on the other hand it's less developed and you're going to have to judge that pretty much
on a case by case basis.
Now the last area I'm going to ask us is Central and South America.
Now I'm only highlighting Central and South America because there are time zones match almost perfectly
with the United States and Canada.
So if you have a project that it is crucial that you have matching time zones it's crucial that you
know at a second's notice you can communicate with your freelancer or with your outsourced firm then
consider Central and South America.
They are not areas that are specifically well-known for anything else.
They don't have strong developer cultures they don't have strong business process outsourced cultures.
But specifically if time zone is the most important thing to you then look for countries like Argentina
Costa Rica anywhere that's kind of in that area.
So in general guys you really want to judge your bid or your proposal based off the merit itself.
If you have specific requirements on your project like say you need fast internet speed or say you need
some type of cultural fluency or you need a reduced accent because you need a freelancer who can speak
on the fly.
These are things to take into consideration and apply those too.
Now what you now know about some of the hotspots around the world for outsourcing in general.
Personally if I had to pick I usually use Eastern Europe.
India is great for certain things.
Central America South America are fantastic for time zones if you're in North America and obviously
the Philippines is great if you're trying to do data entry virtual assistants or anything that involves
the telephone.
OK guys if you have any questions I know a lot of these things are generalizations so don't you know
be up in arms about anything I've said.
But I'm trying to make kind of boil this down and and distill this so that it's helpful to you.
That's why I use those three criteria because those are the only real three things that you should take
into consideration.
There are obvious exceptions in every single area but I'm trying to give you a bit of a shortcut.
When you go and you have to actually pick someone you're just kind of confused about what does it matter
what country they're from.
So I'll see in the next lecture.